[API server] support cordon API server on upgrading (#5132)
skypilot-org/skypilot: docs/source/reference/api-server/api-server-upgrade.rst

.. _sky-api-server-upgrade:

Upgrading SkyPilot API Server
=============================

This page provides an overview of the steps you should follow to upgrade a remote SkyPilot API server deployed by Helm with the :ref:`sky-api-server-deploy` guide. For API server deployed with :ref:`sky-api-server-cloud-deploy`, refer to :ref:`sky-api-server-vm-upgrade`.

.. note::

    Upgrading the API server introduces downtime. We recommend to schedule the upgrade during a maintenance window. If you have a staging environment, you can upgrade the staging environment first to make sure the upgrade is successful before upgrading the production environment.

> 

Author: Removing the comment looks good to me, thanks!

Prerequisites
-------------

> * Complete :ref:`sky-api-server-deploy` to deploy the API server.

Author: Sounds good for brevity

Step 1: Prepare an upgrade
--------------------------

> 1. Get the image you want to upgrade to from SkyPilot dockerhub repository: `nightly release <https://hub.docker.com/r/berkeleyskypilot/skypilot-nightly/tags>`_. A specific tag other than ``latest`` is required to make the upgrade process predictable.

Author: Actually we can't now, helm chart accepts a full image URL

> 1. Get the image you want to upgrade to from SkyPilot dockerhub repository: `nightly release <https://hub.docker.com/r/berkeleyskypilot/skypilot-nightly/tags>`_. A specific tag other than ``latest`` is required to make the upgrade process predictable.

Author: I think we can just avoid mention ``latest`` if we guide users to lookup in our pypi index, there is no ``latest`` anyway

2. Update SkyPilot helm repository to the latest version:

.. code-block:: bash

    helm repo update skypilot

3. Prepare variables for the upgrade, the ``NAMESPACE`` and ``RELEASE_NAME`` should be the same as the previous deployment step:

.. code-block:: bash

    NAMESPACE=<installed-namespace>
    RELEASE_NAME=<installed-release-name>
    # e.g. IMAGE=berkeleyskypilot/skypilot-nightly:1.0.0-dev.20250406
    IMAGE=<image-from-dockerhub>

Step 2: Cordon the API server
------------------------------------------

> To minimize the impact of the downtime introduced by the upgrade, we recommend condon the API server before upgrading the API server. The following steps require `patch` and `exec` (or `port-forward`) access to the API server Pod.

Author: > Can we move this to the front?
Sure

> do we still need this line?
Yes, `helm upgrade --install` does not require `exec` and `port-forward` permissions on Pod.

> 1. Patch the API server to remove it from the Ingress backend:

Author: Thanks!

.. note::

    All new requests will be rejected by the Ingress after this step. Make sure there is no critical service depending on the API server before proceeding.

.. code-block:: bash

>     kubectl get pod -l app=${RELEASE_NAME}-api -oname | xargs kubectl patch --type merge -p '{"metadata": {"labels": {"skypilot.co/ready": null}}}'

Reviewer: This is a bit problematic, because logs could take a long time to finish, making the draining take forever?

2. Verify the API server is cordoned, you should see the following error:

.. code-block:: console

    $ sky api info
    sky.exceptions.ApiServerConnectionError: Could not connect to SkyPilot API server at <URL>. Please ensure that the server is running. Try: curl <URL>

.. dropdown:: Resolve cordon failure for early 0.8.0 nightly release

    If you are upgrading from early 0.8.0 nightly release that does not support cordoning (``sky api info`` will succeed), you can manually enable cordon support by running:

    .. code-block:: bash

        kubectl patch service ${RELEASE_NAME}-api-service -p '{"spec":{"selector":{"skypilot.co/ready":"true"}}}'
    

>     After the patch, verify the API server is cordoned again.

Author: Sounds good, maybe we can kept it until the next release? It is a dropdown to keep brevity

>     After the patch, verify the API server is cordoned again.

Reviewer: I see, in that case, can we just remove `0.8.0` from it, as it is a bit confusing to say `0.8.0 nightly release` (nightly build is not linked to the 0.8.0 release at the moment)

> 3. For requests that have been sent to the API server, check the status of the requests and wait for the critical ones to finish:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Drain the old API server by waiting or canceling current requests:

```

How about we make `Check requests` and `Cancel requests` in two different tabs to save some vertical space?

.. code-block:: console

    $ kubectl get po -l app=${RELEASE_NAME}-api -oname | xargs -I {} kubectl exec {} -c skypilot-api -- sky api status
    sky api status
    ID                                    User             Name        Created         Status
    942f6ab3-f5b6-4a50-acd6-0e8ad64a3ec2  <USER>           sky.launch  a few secs ago  PENDING
    8c5f19ca-513c-4068-b9c9-d4b7728f46fb  <USER>           sky.logs    26 secs ago     RUNNING
    skypilot-status-refresh-daemon        skypilot-system  sky.status  25 mins ago     RUNNING

> The `skypilot-status-refresh-daemon` is a background process managed by API server that can be safely interrupted. For other requests, you can either wait for a request to finish or cancel a request by running:

Reviewer: ```suggestion

.. note::

  The `skypilot-status-refresh-daemon` is a background process managed by API server that can be safely interrupted.
```

.. code-block:: console

    $ kubectl get po -l app=${RELEASE_NAME}-api -oname | xargs -I {} kubectl exec {} -c skypilot-api -- sky api cancel ${ID}

If you do not have `exec` access to the API server Pod, you can also use `port-forward` to access the api status:

.. code-block:: console

    $ kubectl get po -l app=${RELEASE_NAME}-api -oname | xargs -I {} kubectl port-forward {} 46580:46580 > /tmp/port-forward.log 2>&1 &
    $ PORT_FORWARD_PID=$!
    $ sky api login -e http://127.0.0.1:46580
    # Polling the status
    $ sky api status
    # Cancel less critical requests if needed
    $ sky api cancel ${ID}
    # Stop the port-forward after you are satisfied with the status

>     $ kill $PORT_FORWARD_PID

Reviewer: How about we just have it in a dropdown? It does not seem to be a very critical thing to mention.

Author: Sounds good, will do

Step 3: Upgrade SkyPilot clients
--------------------------------

> Currently, compatibility between SkyPilot clients and server is only guaranteed when both sides are running the same version. We recommend upgrading the clients in autonomous pipelines to the same version as the API server before upgrading the API server to avoid breaking the pipeline after the upgrade. The image tag of API server is consistent with the pip package version, so you can upgrade the clients to the same version as the API server by running:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, compatibility between SkyPilot clients and server is only guaranteed when both sides are running on **the same version**. We recommend upgrading all the clients to the same version during the maintainence window to avoid breaking the pipeline after the upgrade.
```

Author: Yeah, I'm a bit worried that upgrade all clients may be impractical, especially for random human users

.. code-block:: bash

    # For nightly release. Keep the CLOUD_LIST in sync with the previous installation.

>     pip install -U "skypilot-nightly[${CLOUD_LIST}]"==${IMAGE_TAG}

Reviewer: Cloud list is not neccessary?
```suggestion
    pip install -U skypilot-nightly==${IMAGE_TAG}
```

> For clients used by developers, it is okay to upgrade to the same version as the API server either before or after the upgrade. Because if there is a compatibility issue, an error will raised to the developer with the upgrade command prompted.

Reviewer: Might be fine to leave this paragraph?

Author: Yes if we ask users to upgrade **all** clients in the previous section

.. _sky-api-server-upgrade:

Upgrading SkyPilot API Server
=============================

This page provides an overview of the steps you should follow to upgrade a remote SkyPilot API server:

* :ref:`sky-api-server-helm-upgrade`
* :ref:`sky-api-server-vm-upgrade`

.. _sky-api-server-helm-upgrade:

Upgrade API server deployed with Helm
-----------------------------------------

Here we introduce the steps for upgrading a remote API server deployed with :ref:`Helm deployement <sky-api-server-deploy>`.

.. note::

    Upgrading the API server introduces downtime. We recommend to schedule the upgrade during a **maintenance window**: drain the old API server and upgrade.

Step 1: Prepare an upgrade

> --------------------------

Reviewer: The steps need to use
```suggestion
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
```
as subtitles

1. Find the version to use in SkyPilot `nightly channel <https://pypi.org/project/skypilot-nightly/#history>`_.
2. Update SkyPilot helm repository to the latest version:

.. code-block:: bash

    helm repo update skypilot

3. Prepare variables for the upgrade, the ``NAMESPACE`` and ``RELEASE_NAME`` should be the same as the previous deployment step:

.. code-block:: bash

    NAMESPACE=skypilot # TODO: change to your installed namespace
    RELEASE_NAME=skypilot # TODO: change to your installed release name
    VERSION=1.0.0-dev20250408 # TODO: change to the version you want to upgrade to
    IMAGE_REPO=berkeleyskypilot/skypilot-nightly

> Step 2: Cordon the API server

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Step 2: (Optional) Cordon and drain the API server
```

-----------------------------

> To minimize the impact of the downtime introduced by the upgrade, we recommend condon the API server before upgrading the API server. The following steps require `patch` and `exec` (or `port-forward`) access to the API server Pod.

Reviewer: Actually, let's have step 2 at the end of this `Upgrade API server deployed with Helm` section, i.e. making it an optional step if a user does not need to wait for on-going requests to finish. The structure can be as follows:

````
Upgrading SkyPilot API Server
|- Step 1: Prepare an upgrade
|- Step 2: Upgrade SkyPilot clients and API server (merge step 3 and 4)
Upgrading API server will interrupt any pending and on-going requests on the API server, e.g., on-goining ``sky launch``. You can recover on-going request by running the same command again after the new API server starts. To minimize the impact of the downtime introduced by the upgrade during the maintainence window, you can also :ref:`condon and drain the API server <cordon-drain-api-server>` before upgrading the API server.
|- Step 3: Verify the upgrade
|- Optional: Cordon and drain API server before upgrade
To minimize the impact of the downtime introduced by the upgrade, we can condon and drain the API server before upgrading the API server first. 

.. tip::

  The following steps require `patch` and `exec` (or `port-forward`) access to the API server Pod.

````

Author: How about we still keep step 2 before upgrading the client and mark it as optional? It is no benefit to upgrade all clients before upgrading the API server without the draining process as stated in https://github.com/skypilot-org/skypilot/pull/5132#discussion_r2036388709

The upgraded API server is ready to serve requests after the pod is running and the ``READY`` column shows ``1/1``. The cordon will be removed automatically after the upgrade.

Step 5: Verify the upgrade
--------------------------

Verify the API server is able to serve requests and the version is consistent with the version you upgraded to:

.. code-block:: console

    $ sky api info
    Using SkyPilot API server: <URL>
    ├── Status: healthy, commit: <COMMIT>, version: <VERSION>
    └── User: <USER> (<USER_ID>)

If possible, you can also trigger your pipelines that depend on the API server to verify there is no compatibility issue after the upgrade.

.. _sky-api-server-vm-upgrade:

Upgrade the API server deployed on VM
-------------------------------------

.. note::

    VM deployment does not offer graceful upgrading support. We recommend to use Helm deployment :ref:`sky-api-server-deploy` in production environments.

Suppose the cluster name of the API server is ``api-server`` (which is used in the :ref:`sky-api-server-cloud-deploy` guide), you can upgrade the API server with the following steps:

> 1. Switch to the original API server that is used to launch the API server VM instance. It is usually the local API server that was launched automatically when you ran ``sky launch`` to launch the API server VM instance in the :ref:`sky-api-server-cloud-deploy` guide:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Switch to the original API server endpoint used to launch the cloud VM for API server. It is usually locally started when you ran ``sky launch -c api-server skypilot-api-server.yaml` in :ref:`sky-api-server-cloud-deploy` guide:
```

.. code-block:: bash

    # Replace http://localhost:46580 with the real API server endpoint if you were not using the local API server to launch the API server VM instance.
    sky api login -e http://localhost:46580

2. Check the API server VM instance is ``UP``:

.. code-block:: console

>     $ sky status --no-show-managed-jobs --no-show-services

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    $ sky status api-server
```

Author: nice!

    Clusters
    NAME        LAUNCHED     RESOURCES                                                                  STATUS  AUTOSTOP  COMMAND
    api-server  41 mins ago  1x AWS(c6i.2xlarge, image_id={'us-east-1': 'docker:berkeleyskypilot/sk...  UP      -         sky exec api-server pip i...

> 3. Upgrade the SkyPilot pip package on the VM and restart the API server:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Upgrade the SkyPilot on the VM and restart the API server:
```

.. note::

>     Upgrade and restart the API server will interrupt all running requests and may cause compatibility issue that requires upgrading the clients to resolve.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Upgrade and restart the API server will interrupt all running requests.
```

Reviewer: Instead of talking about backward compatibility here, how about we just add another step to upgrade all clients, just like the helm deployment upgrade guide.

Author: Actually, there is little gain to explicitly upgrade all clients without draining. Because:

- If there is no break change, upgrading is not actually needed;
- If there is a break change, upgrading client break the communication between client/server immediately;

But sure we can add the step and warn users about this

Reviewer: Ahh, when we talk about upgrading the clients, we should mention that if cordon and drain is not done, clients should wait until the API server to finish upgrade manually. We can have some sentences like the following in the client upgrade section, so that we can keep the cordon & drain section to be at the end. Reason for keeping it later: we want to avoid the feeling of complexity for non-advanced users, but also enable the advanced user use case.

```
After upgrading the clients, they should avoid being used until the API server is upgraded to the new version. To enforce the cordon and drain of the old API server, you can refer to :ref:`section-to-cordon-and-drain`.
```

Wdyt?

Author: Sounds good!

.. code-block:: bash

    sky exec api-server "pip install -U skypilot-nightly[all] && sky api stop && sky api start --deploy"
    # Alternatively, you can also upgrade to a specific version with:
    sky exec api-server "pip install -U skypilot-nightly[all]==${VERSION} && sky api stop && sky api start --deploy"

4. Switch back to the remote API server:

.. code-block:: bash

>     sky api login -e http://$(sky status --endpoint 46580 api-server)

Reviewer: let's keep them two lines to make it easier to read ; )

5. Verify the API server is running and the version is consistent with the version you upgraded to:

.. code-block:: console

    $ sky api info
    Using SkyPilot API server: <URL>
    ├── Status: healthy, commit: <COMMIT>, version: <VERSION>

>     └── User: <USER> (<USER_ID>)

Reviewer: Let's just use an actual commit and version here. For the user we can show some mocked one, e.g. `alice (abcd1234)`

Author: Good call!

.. _sky-api-server-upgrade:

Upgrading SkyPilot API Server
=============================

This page provides an overview of the steps you should follow to upgrade a remote SkyPilot API server:

* :ref:`sky-api-server-helm-upgrade`
* :ref:`sky-api-server-vm-upgrade`

.. _sky-api-server-helm-upgrade:

Upgrade API server deployed with Helm
-----------------------------------------

Here we introduce the steps for upgrading a remote API server deployed with :ref:`Helm deployement <sky-api-server-deploy>`.

.. note::

>     Upgrading the API server introduces downtime. We recommend to schedule the upgrade during a **maintenance window**: drain the old API server and upgrade.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Upgrading the API server introduces downtime. We recommend to schedule the upgrade during a **maintenance window**: cordon & drain the old API server and upgrade.
```

Step 1: Prepare an upgrade
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> 1. Find the version to use in SkyPilot `nightly channel <https://pypi.org/project/skypilot-nightly/#history>`_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Find the version to use in SkyPilot `nightly build <https://pypi.org/project/skypilot-nightly/#history>`_.
```

2. Update SkyPilot helm repository to the latest version:

.. code-block:: bash

    helm repo update skypilot

3. Prepare variables for the upgrade, the ``NAMESPACE`` and ``RELEASE_NAME`` should be the same as the previous deployment step:

.. code-block:: bash

    NAMESPACE=skypilot # TODO: change to your installed namespace
    RELEASE_NAME=skypilot # TODO: change to your installed release name
    VERSION=1.0.0-dev20250408 # TODO: change to the version you want to upgrade to

>     IMAGE_REPO=berkeleyskypilot/skypilot-nightly

Reviewer: This could be hard coded in our helm already. Do we still need to specify this?

        $ PORT_FORWARD_PID=$!
        $ sky api login -e http://127.0.0.1:46580
        # Polling the status
        $ sky api status
        # Cancel less critical requests if needed
        $ sky api cancel ${ID}
        # Stop the port-forward after you are satisfied with the status
        $ kill $PORT_FORWARD_PID

Step 3: Upgrade SkyPilot clients
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Currently, compatibility between SkyPilot clients and server is only guaranteed when both sides are running on **the same version**. We recommend upgrading all the clients to the same version during the maintainence window to avoid breaking the pipeline after the upgrade:

.. code-block:: bash

    pip install -U skypilot-nightly==${VERSION}

Step 4: Upgrade the API server
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Once all the critical requests have been finished and the clients in autonomous pipelines have been upgraded, you can upgrade the API server with the following command:

.. code-block:: bash

    # --reuse-values is critical to keep the values set in the previous installation steps.
    helm upgrade -n $NAMESPACE $RELEASE_NAME skypilot/skypilot-nightly --devel --reuse-values \

>       --set apiService.image=${IMAGE_REPO}:${VERSION}

Reviewer: IIRC, we had a `--version` argument, can it be used?

https://docs.skypilot.co/en/latest/reference/api-server/api-server-admin-deploy.html#step-3-deploy-the-api-server-helm-chart

Can we directly use the default image repo specifed in our values.yaml, so people don't need to manually set the `IMAGE_REPO` env var?

Author: `--version` specifies the version of our **helm chart**. For the repo thing, I lean to use `.image` for simplicity, there are charts (like nginx-ingress) do separate image to `repo` and `tag` config. Here's a comparison:

Pros of sticking in `.image`:

- The final image to use and the way to customize repository are straightforward
- Better interoperate with pipeline: just use the image built in previous steps without parsing
- No compatibility issue to handle for us

Cons:

- Exposing more details to inexperienced users
- More verbose, such as this doc

I think in general the difference is trivial compared to our main functionality, how about we just stick in the `.image` method?

Reviewer: Good point! Thanks for the detailed explanation. `.image` sounds good to me.

Suppose the cluster name of the API server is ``api-server`` (which is used in the :ref:`sky-api-server-cloud-deploy` guide), you can upgrade the API server with the following steps:

1. Switch to the original API server endpoint used to launch the cloud VM for API server. It is usually locally started when you ran ``sky launch -c api-server skypilot-api-server.yaml`` in :ref:`sky-api-server-cloud-deploy` guide:

.. code-block:: bash

    # Replace http://localhost:46580 with the real API server endpoint if you were not using the local API server to launch the API server VM instance.
    sky api login -e http://localhost:46580

2. Check the API server VM instance is ``UP``:

.. code-block:: console

    $ sky status api-server
    Clusters
    NAME        LAUNCHED     RESOURCES                                                                  STATUS  AUTOSTOP  COMMAND
    api-server  41 mins ago  1x AWS(c6i.2xlarge, image_id={'us-east-1': 'docker:berkeleyskypilot/sk...  UP      -         sky exec api-server pip i...

3. Upgrade the SkyPilot on the VM and restart the API server:

.. note::

>     Upgrade and restart the API server will interrupt all running requests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Upgrade and restart the API server will interrupt all pending and running requests.
```

.. code-block:: bash

    sky exec api-server "pip install -U skypilot-nightly[all] && sky api stop && sky api start --deploy"
    # Alternatively, you can also upgrade to a specific version with:
    sky exec api-server "pip install -U skypilot-nightly[all]==${VERSION} && sky api stop && sky api start --deploy"

4. Switch back to the remote API server:

.. code-block:: bash

>     URL=$(sky status --endpoint api-server)

Reviewer: nit: `URL` -> `ENDPOINT` for consistent term.

    sky api login -e $URL

5. Verify the API server is running and the version is consistent with the version you upgraded to:

.. code-block:: console

    $ sky api info
    Using SkyPilot API server: <URL>

>     ├── Status: healthy, commit: 633e16611f2f858dc27c9eae2f410811e0bc714c, version: 1.0.0-dev0

Reviewer: The version here should be the version specifed above instead of `dev0`?

    Upgrading the API server introduces downtime. We recommend to schedule the upgrade during a **maintenance window**: cordon & drain the old API server and upgrade.

Step 1: Prepare an upgrade
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

1. Find the version to use in SkyPilot `nightly build <https://pypi.org/project/skypilot-nightly/#history>`_.
2. Update SkyPilot helm repository to the latest version:

.. code-block:: bash

    helm repo update skypilot

3. Prepare variables for the upgrade, the ``NAMESPACE`` and ``RELEASE_NAME`` should be the same as the previous deployment step:

.. code-block:: bash

    NAMESPACE=skypilot # TODO: change to your installed namespace
    RELEASE_NAME=skypilot # TODO: change to your installed release name
    VERSION=1.0.0-dev20250410 # TODO: change to the version you want to upgrade to
    IMAGE_REPO=berkeleyskypilot/skypilot-nightly

Step 2: Upgrade the API server and clients
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. note::

    * Upgrading the API server will interrupt any pending and on-going requests on the API server, e.g., on-goining ``sky launch``. You can recover on-going requests by running the same commands again after the new API server starts.

>     * Upgrading the server or clients will break the compatibility between the server and clients.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * Upgrading only one of the server or clients may break the compatibility between the server and clients.
```

    skypilot-demo-api-server-cf4896bdf-62c96   0/1     Init:1/2   0          24s
    skypilot-demo-api-server-cf4896bdf-62c96   0/1     PodInitializing   0          26s
    skypilot-demo-api-server-cf4896bdf-62c96   0/1     Running           0          27s
    skypilot-demo-api-server-cf4896bdf-62c96   1/1     Running           0          50s

The upgraded API server is ready to serve requests after the pod is running and the ``READY`` column shows ``1/1``. The cordon will be removed automatically after the upgrade.

Step 3: Verify the upgrade
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Verify the API server is able to serve requests and the version is consistent with the version you upgraded to:

.. code-block:: console

    $ sky api info
    Using SkyPilot API server: <ENDPOINT>
    ├── Status: healthy, commit: 022a5c3ffe258f365764b03cb20fac70934f5a60, version: 1.0.0.dev20250410
    └── User: aclice (abcd1234)

If possible, you can also trigger your pipelines that depend on the API server to verify there is no compatibility issue after the upgrade.

.. _cordon-drain-api-server:

Optional: Cordon and drain the API server
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> The following steps require `patch` and `exec` (or `port-forward`) access to the API server Pod.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

The following steps help void new request being submitted to the API server (cordon) and wait for all existing requests to finish on old API server (drain) during the maintainance window -- gracefully upgrade the API server.

.. note:: 
  It requires `patch` and `exec` (or `port-forward`) access to the API server Pod.
```

1. Cordon SkyPilot API server to avoid new request:

.. code-block:: bash

    kubectl get pod -l app=${RELEASE_NAME}-api -oname | xargs kubectl patch --type merge -p '{"metadata": {"labels": {"skypilot.co/ready": null}}}'
    
.. note::
    All new requests will be rejected by the Ingress after this step. Make sure there is no critical service depending on the API server before proceeding.

2. Verify the API server is cordoned, you should see the following error:

.. code-block:: console

    $ sky api info
    sky.exceptions.ApiServerConnectionError: Could not connect to SkyPilot API server at <ENDPOINT>. Please ensure that the server is running. Try: curl <ENDPIONT>

> .. dropdown:: Resolve cordon failure for early 0.8.0 nightly release

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. dropdown:: Resolve cordon failure for early nightly release
```

.. _sky-api-server-upgrade:

Upgrading SkyPilot API Server
=============================

This page provides an overview of the steps you should follow to upgrade a remote SkyPilot API server:

* :ref:`sky-api-server-helm-upgrade`
* :ref:`sky-api-server-vm-upgrade`

.. _sky-api-server-helm-upgrade:

Upgrade API server deployed with Helm
-----------------------------------------

Here we introduce the steps for upgrading a remote API server deployed with :ref:`Helm deployement <sky-api-server-deploy>`.

.. note::

>     Upgrading the API server introduces downtime. We recommend to schedule the upgrade during a **maintenance window**: cordon & drain the old API server and upgrade.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Upgrading the API server introduces downtime. We recommend scheduling the upgrade during a **maintenance window**: cordon and drain the old API server, then perform the upgrade.
```

Step 1: Prepare an upgrade
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

1. Find the version to use in SkyPilot `nightly build <https://pypi.org/project/skypilot-nightly/#history>`_.
2. Update SkyPilot helm repository to the latest version:

.. code-block:: bash

    helm repo update skypilot

> 3. Prepare variables for the upgrade, the ``NAMESPACE`` and ``RELEASE_NAME`` should be the same as the previous deployment step:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Prepare versioning environment variables.  ``NAMESPACE`` and ``RELEASE_NAME`` should be set to the currently installed namespace and release:
```
By the way, what does "release name" mean?

Author: A term in helm, represents a deployed instance. Here we referring the ``RELEASE_NAME`` user used in deployment stesp https://docs.skypilot.co/en/latest/reference/api-server/api-server-admin-deploy.html#step-3-deploy-the-api-server-helm-chart

.. code-block:: bash

    NAMESPACE=skypilot # TODO: change to your installed namespace
    RELEASE_NAME=skypilot # TODO: change to your installed release name
    VERSION=1.0.0-dev20250410 # TODO: change to the version you want to upgrade to
    IMAGE_REPO=berkeleyskypilot/skypilot-nightly

Step 2: Upgrade the API server and clients
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. note::

>     * Upgrading the API server will interrupt any pending and on-going requests on the API server, e.g., on-goining ``sky launch``. You can recover on-going requests by running the same commands again after the new API server starts.
>     * Upgrading only one of the server or clients may break the compatibility between the server and clients.
> 
>     To minimize the impact of upgrading, you can :ref:`cordon and drain the API server <cordon-drain-api-server>` before upgrading the API server and clients to enforce that all the requests to be finished before the upgrade and there is no new request during the upgrade.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    To minimize the impact of upgrading, you can :ref:`cordon and drain the API server <cordon-drain-api-server>` before performing this step. The optional cordon and drain step enforces that all requests be finished before the upgrade and there is no new request during the upgrade.
    
    If you choose not to perform cordon and drain, upgrade has the following behaviors:
    
    * Upgrading the API server will interrupt any pending and ongoing requests on the API server, e.g., ongoining ``sky launch``. Clients can recover ongoing requests by running the same commands again after the new API server starts.
    * Upgrading only the server or only the client may break the compatibility between them.
```

Reordered a bit, wdyt?

Rephrased "Upgrading only one of the server or clients may break the compatibility between the server and clients." ; is it accurate?

Author: Looks good, thanks!

> Upgrade the clients:

Reviewer 2: When reading here, an admin may think "how can I make sure all the clients (humans) run this"? Which leads to the question: should we add a brief section on client-server back-compat guarantees? E.g., admin may want to perform the server upgrade, and have human clients asynchronously upgrade their client versions.

Author: We can have this after https://github.com/skypilot-org/skypilot/issues/5184

The first version of this doc asked users to ensure all the clients used by pipeline are upgraded before upgrading the server and the clients used by human developers can be upgraded asynchronously when the user hit the API error  in the next time. This was simplified to current one to keep brevity, how do you like?

Reviewer 2: If clients (humans) didn't do this and they send a request to an updated API server, what happens? Is there a nice version mismatch error? I feel this is important to hint about in this doc.

Author: Good point, making some refinement

    skypilot-demo-api-server-cf4896bdf-62c96   0/1     Init:0/2   0          7s
    skypilot-demo-api-server-cf4896bdf-62c96   0/1     Init:1/2   0          24s
    skypilot-demo-api-server-cf4896bdf-62c96   0/1     PodInitializing   0          26s
    skypilot-demo-api-server-cf4896bdf-62c96   0/1     Running           0          27s
    skypilot-demo-api-server-cf4896bdf-62c96   1/1     Running           0          50s

The upgraded API server is ready to serve requests after the pod is running and the ``READY`` column shows ``1/1``. The cordon will be removed automatically after the upgrade.

Step 3: Verify the upgrade
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Verify the API server is able to serve requests and the version is consistent with the version you upgraded to:

.. code-block:: console

    $ sky api info
    Using SkyPilot API server: <ENDPOINT>
    ├── Status: healthy, commit: 022a5c3ffe258f365764b03cb20fac70934f5a60, version: 1.0.0.dev20250410
    └── User: aclice (abcd1234)

If possible, you can also trigger your pipelines that depend on the API server to verify there is no compatibility issue after the upgrade.

.. _cordon-drain-api-server:

> Optional: Cordon and drain the API server

Reviewer: This process can take longer and adds more burden. If people are ok with aborting all the existing requests, or they can manually ask their teammate to not submitting requests during the maintainance window, this process is not needed. Making this optional at the end could reduce the mental burden for upgrade, but still make the cordon and drain feasible.

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The following steps help void new request being submitted to the API server (cordon) and wait for all existing requests to finish on old API server (drain) during the maintainance window -- gracefully upgrade the API server.

.. note:: 

>   It requires `patch` and `exec` (or `port-forward`) access to the API server Pod.

Author: Good catch
